New helpers for options flows (#2435)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: blog/2024-11-07-options-flow.md

    """Options flow handler."""

    def __init__(self) -> None:
        """Initialize options flow."""
        self._conf_app_id: str | None = None
```

Old code with `OptionsFlow` properties:
```python
@staticmethod
@callback
def async_get_options_flow(
    config_entry: ConfigEntry,
) -> OptionsFlowHandler:
    """Create the options flow."""
    return OptionsFlowHandler(config_entry)

class OptionsFlowHandler(OptionsFlow):
    """Options flow handler."""

    def __init__(self, config_entry: ConfigEntry) -> None:
        """Initialize options flow."""
        self.config_entry = config_entry
        self._conf_app_id: str | None = None
```

Furthermore, the main purpose of the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class was to provide `self.config_entry` property, and it is recommended to avoid using it in new code.

Custom components that wish to drop references to `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` may need further code adjustments if there are references to `self.options`:
- if you are only reading the options values, then it is recommended that you adjust the reads to `self.config_entry.options` (see https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/129895)

> - if you are updating/mutating the options values inside a single step, then it may be necessary to first clone the options (`options = deepcopy(dict(self.config_entry.options))` (see https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/129928)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if you are updating/mutating the options values inside a single step, then it may be necessary to first copy the options (`options = deepcopy(dict(self.config_entry.options))` (see https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/129928)
```

### Backwards compatibility
Until Home Assistant Core 2025.12, it is possible to set `self.config_entry` manually, but doing so will log a warning asking users to open an issue on the custom integration's bug tracker.

New code:
```python
@staticmethod
@callback
def async_get_options_flow(
    config_entry: ConfigEntry,
) -> OptionsFlowHandler:
    """Create the options flow."""
    return OptionsFlowHandler()

class OptionsFlowHandler(OptionsFlow):
    """Options flow handler."""

    def __init__(self) -> None:
        """Initialize options flow."""
        self._conf_app_id: str | None = None
```

Old code with `OptionsFlow` properties:
```python
@staticmethod
@callback
def async_get_options_flow(
    config_entry: ConfigEntry,
) -> OptionsFlowHandler:
    """Create the options flow."""
    return OptionsFlowHandler(config_entry)

class OptionsFlowHandler(OptionsFlow):
    """Options flow handler."""

    def __init__(self, config_entry: ConfigEntry) -> None:
        """Initialize options flow."""
        self.config_entry = config_entry
        self._conf_app_id: str | None = None
```

### Special handling of OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry

> The main purpose of the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class was to provide `self.config_entry` property, which is now deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main purpose of the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class was to provide `self.config_entry` property, which is now already provided by the parent class.
```

> The main purpose of the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class was to provide `self.config_entry` property, which is now already provided by the parent class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main purpose of the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class was to provide the `self.config_entry` property, which is now already provided by the parent class.
```

> There are currently no plans to remove this compatibility, but it is kept for backward compatibility only and it should be avoided in new code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are currently no plans to remove the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class, but it is kept for backward compatibility only and it should be avoided in new code.
```

> Custom components that wish to drop references to `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` will need to consider how they are referrencing `self.options`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom integrations that wish to drop references to `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` will need to consider how they are referencing `self.options`:
```

---
author: epenet
authorURL: https://github.com/epenet
title: "New options flows properties, and deprecated OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry"
---

New helper properties have been added to the `OptionsFlow` to facilitate access to the config entry:
- `self._config_entry_id` gives you access to the ID of the config entry
- `self.config_entry` gives you access to the config entry

With the addition of these properties to the base `OptionsFlow`, setting `self.config_entry` property is deprecated and will fail from 2025.12.

> Since the main purpose of the `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry` class was to provide this property, it is also deprecated.

Reviewer: I don't think we should deprecate `OptionsFlowWithConfigEntry`.
